---
layout: article

title: "How I built my blog and website using Jekyll"
image-dir: "Weekly Log"

permalink: /articles/:title

categories: [Weekly Log]
---


I’ve finally launched the blog here on my website! I wanted to do this for some time, mainly because I want to start writing more and I want to start building like an online home for myself, to host all my projects, my ideas, my thoughts, and even though I also share my words on Medium, it’s a good idea to have my own blog as well, so I can get full control.

### Too long, didn't read
This is kind of a large post, so here're the some links for the different sections.
- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Setting up Jekyll](#setting-up-jekyll)
- [Project structure](#project-structure)
- [Overriding the default theme](#overriding-the-default-theme)
- [Creating pages](#creating-pages)

### Enter Jekyll
Amongst a lot of options of platforms that I could’ve used to build this, I choose [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/), which is a static site generator.
So, you have a bunch of source files in your local machine, and you can “compile” them into plain HTML/CSS/JavaScript. There are a lot of articles out there that do a much better job explaining how this works. [This one](https://wsvincent.com/what-is-a-static-site-generator/) by Will Vincent, [or this](https://dev.to/ruthreyer/what-are-static-site-generators-356p) by Ruth Reyer are great.

For me, there are two main reasons to use a static site generator, in this case being Jekyll:
- **Cost**: It’s super low cost to something like this. I basically just pay for my domain name, because I use Netlify to host my files.
- **Simplicity**: There are a lot of things that a SSG doesn’t allow you to do. But for my needs, it’s just perfect. I can write articles, I can create static pages, make a portfolio (which I’ll eventually create), and that’s about it. I don’t need much more that that.

There are a lot of other great reasons to use something like this, like security, scalability and speed for example.


### Getting started
The first step was to design my website. This is probably the 1000th version, but this time I’m certain this one is here to stay. It’s super basic, and it currently only has a couple of pages: Home and Articles (and the  Article page of course). Here’s how it looks:

Img here

Ok, nice, design is done. I can add and make things better later on, but for now it’s perfect.


### Setting up Jekyll
Being no expert on web development (I’m still in the beginning phases of my journey), this how-to Jekyll “guide” will be written in a super non-technical way. Also, I’m using MacOS, but I assume that it won’t change a lot for Windows.

The first thing you’ll want to do is to install it on your computer. Open up your terminal, and run:

```bash
$ gem install bundler jekyll
```

This will install [Bundler](https://bundler.io/) and Jekyll. Bundler is a tool that allows you to install all your project gems in a single command.

Next, go to the directory where you want to have your website files, and run:

```bash
$ jekyll new my-website
```

This will create a new directory called “my-website” (you can name it whatever you want). Now, navigate into that directory:

```bash
$ cd my-website
```

And run:

```bash
$ jekyll serve
```

This will run the server, so go aheada and open your browser, navigate to [http://localhost:4000](http://localhost:4000) , and there it is, your Jekyll website!


### Project structure
By default, Jekyll will create a few files for you:
- ```_config.yml``` this is your configuration file.
- ```404.html``` the page that get’s rendered on the browser when there’s a 404 error.
- ```index.md``` a .md file with the content for your Home page.
- ```about.md``` a .md file with the content for your About page.
- ```Gemfile``` and ```Gemfile.lock``` the files that allows you to manage all your required gems for the project.

And a couple of directories:
- ```_site``` this is the directory that contains all the HTML, CSS and JavaScript files, after Jekyll “compiles” everything. It’s what you’ll want to deploy to the server later on.
- ```_posts``` where all your posts’ files live.


When we created the website using the ```jekyll new``` command, Jekyll will build the site using a default gem-based theme called [Minima](https://github.com/jekyll/minima). This means that there are some files and directories that are stored in the theme's gem, and we don't have access to them.


### Overriding the default theme

In my case, I wanted to completely override this with my own styles and structure. To do this, I first opened the ```_config.yml``` file and deleted this line:

```yml
theme: minima
```

And I also deleted the ```about.md``` file because I won't have an About page right now.

Then I created some new directories: 
- ```_drafts``` to store all the blog drafts.
- ```_includes``` to store HTML blocks like the site header or footer.
- ```_layouts``` to store the layouts for the pages, like the articles page.
- ```_sass``` where all the Sass files are.

Here's how my site structure is looking at this stage:

```
├── Gemfile
├── Gemfile.lock
├── _config.yml
├── _drafts
├── _includes
├── _layouts
├── _posts
│   └── 2019-04-11-welcome-to-jekyll.md
└── index.md
```

Now, if you try to open your site, everything will be empty. The reason why is because of how Jekyll works with pages and layouts. I’ll try to explain this in the next section.


### Creating pages
Let’s first open up that ```index.md``` and checkout what’s inside.

Img here.

As you can see, it’s almost empty. That block of code at the start of the file, enclosed by these tripple dashes is called **Front Matter**. This is the place where we can set variables that allows us to control a few things.

Right now, there’s only that ```layout: home```. This means that the index page will use a ```layout``` called ```home```. But because we deleted the line in the ```_config.yml``` that said to Jekyll to use the Minima theme, it now has no ```home``` layout to point to. Let's fix this.
 
Create a new file inside the ```_layouts``` directory, named ```home.html```, and add  this code inside:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>My Jekyll Site</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    {{ "{{ content " }}}}
  </body>
</html>
```

This is a basic HTML structure, but take a look at that ```{{ "{{ content " }}}}```. That's a [Liquid](https://shopify.github.io/liquid/) tag. Liquid is a template language created by [Shopify](https://shopify.com), and in very simple terms, it allows us to introduce dynamic content inside our pages. And those double ```{``` are used to output the contents of a variable.

In this case, it's outputting a variable named ```content```. But if you open up your site in the browser, it is still completely empty. That's because ```content``` holds whatever you typed in your ```index.md``` file.

So, let's try this out. Open up ```index.md```, and type whatever you want after the end of the Front Matter. Here's mine:

```
---
layout: home
---

Hello world! This is comming directly from the index.md file.
```

Go to [localhost:4000](http://localhost:4000), and this is what you be seeing:

img here

Fantastic! Now, let's try another thing. In your ```index.md```, add another variable to the front matter. Here's mine:

```
---
layout: home
title: My Jekyll Site
---
```

Now go back to your ```home.html```, and instead of having the page title hardcoded inside those ```<title>``` tags, place your ```title``` variable in there, like this:

```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html lang="en">
  <head>
    <title>{{ "{{ page.title " }}}}</title>
  </head>

  <body>
    {{ "{{ content " }}}}
  </body>
</html>
```

Note that we had to use ```{{ "{{ page.title " }}}}``` instead of just ```{{ "{{ title " }}}}```. This is because that ```{{ "{{ title " }}}}``` in the front matter